# 5. Using Structs to Structure Related Data

A struct, or structure,
is a custom data type that
lets you package together
and
name multiple related values that
make up a meaningful group.
If you’re familiar with an object-oriented language,
a struct is like an object’s data attributes.
In this chapter,
we’ll compare and contrast tuples with structs
to build on what you already know
and
demonstrate when structs are a better way to group data.

We’ll demonstrate how to define and instantiate structs.
We’ll discuss how to define associated functions,
especially the kind of associated functions called methods,
to specify behavior associated with a struct type.
Structs and enums (discussed in Chapter 6)
are the building blocks for creating new types in your program’s domain
to take full advantage of Rust’s compile-time type checking.

## 5.1 Defining and Instantiating Structs

Structs are similar to tuples,
discussed in “The Tuple Type” section,
in that both hold multiple related values.
Like tuples,
the pieces of a struct can be different types.
Unlike with tuples,
in a struct you’ll name each piece of data
so it’s clear what the values mean.
Adding these names means that
structs are more flexible than tuples:
you don’t have to
rely on the order of the data to specify
or
access the values of an instance.

To define a struct,
we enter the keyword struct
and name the entire struct.
A struct’s name should describe
the significance of
the pieces of data
being grouped together.
Then,
inside curly brackets,
we define the names and types of the pieces of data,
which we call fields.
For example,
Listing 5-1 shows a struct that
stores information about a user account.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
struct User {
    active: bool,
    username: String,
    email: String,
    sign_in_count: u64,
}
```
Listing 5-1: A User struct definition

To use a struct after we’ve defined it,
we create an instance of that struct
by specifying concrete values for each of the fields.
We create an instance
by stating the name of the struct
and then add curly brackets containing key:
value pairs,
where the keys are the names of the fields
and the values are the data we want to store in those fields.
We don’t have to specify the fields in the same order in
which we declared them in the struct.
In other words,
the struct definition is like a general template for the type,
and instances fill in that template with particular data
to create values of the type.
For example,
we can declare a particular user
as shown in Listing 5-2.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn main() {
    let user1 = User {
        active: true,
        username: String::from("someusername123"),
        email: String::from("someone@example.com"),
        sign_in_count: 1,
    };
}
```
Listing 5-2: Creating an instance of the User struct

To get a specific value from a struct,
we use dot notation.
For example,
to access this user’s email address,
we use user1.email.
If the instance is mutable,
we can change a value by using the dot notation
and assigning into a particular field.
Listing 5-3 shows how to change the value
in the email field of a mutable User instance.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut user1 = User {
        active: true,
        username: String::from("someusername123"),
        email: String::from("someone@example.com"),
        sign_in_count: 1,
    };

    user1.email = String::from("anotheremail@example.com");
}
```
Listing 5-3: Changing the value in the email field of a User instance

Note that the entire instance must be mutable;
Rust doesn’t allow us to mark only certain fields as mutable.
As with any expression,
we can construct a new instance of the struct
as the last expression in the function body
to implicitly return that new instance.

Listing 5-4 shows a build_user function that
returns a User instance with the given email and username.
The active field gets the value of true,
and the sign_in_count gets a value of 1.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
    User {
        active: true,
        username: username,
        email: email,
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```
Listing 5-4: A build_user function that takes an email and username and returns a User instance

It makes sense to
name the function parameters
with the same name as the struct fields,
but having to repeat
the email and username field names and variables
is a bit tedious.
If the struct had more fields,
repeating each name would get even more annoying.
Luckily,
there’s a convenient shorthand!

### Using the Field Init Shorthand

Because
the parameter names
and the struct field names
are exactly the same in Listing 5-4,
we can use the field init shorthand syntax
to rewrite build_user
so it behaves exactly the same
but doesn’t have the repetition of username and email,
as shown in Listing 5-5.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
    User {
        active: true,
        username,
        email,
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```
Listing 5-5: A build_user function that uses field init shorthand because the username and email parameters have the same name as struct fields

Here,
we’re creating a new instance of the User struct,
which has a field named email.
We want to set the email field’s value
to the value in the email parameter of
the build_user function.
Because
the email field and the email parameter
have the same name,
we only need to write
email
rather than
email: email.

### Creating Instances from Other Instances with Struct Update Syntax

It’s often useful
to create a new instance of a struct that
includes most of the values from another instance,
but changes some.
You can do this using struct update syntax.

First,
in Listing 5-6 we show how to create a new User instance in user2 regularly,
without the update syntax.
We set a new value for email
but otherwise use the same values from user1 that
we created in Listing 5-2.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn main() {
    // --snip--

    let user2 = User {
        active: user1.active,
        username: user1.username,
        email: String::from("another@example.com"),
        sign_in_count: user1.sign_in_count,
    };
}
```
Listing 5-6: Creating a new User instance using one of the values from user1

Using struct update syntax,
we can achieve the same effect with less code,
as shown in Listing 5-7.
The syntax .. specifies that
the remaining fields not explicitly set
should have the same value
as the fields in the given instance.

Filename: src/main.rs
```rust
fn main() {
    // --snip--

    let user2 = User {
        email: String::from("another@example.com"),
        ..user1
    };
}
```
Listing 5-7: Using struct update syntax to set a new email value for a User instance but to use the rest of the values from user1

The code in Listing 5-7
also creates an instance in user2 that
has a different value for email
but has the same values for
the username, active, and sign_in_count fields from user1.
The ..user1 must come last to specify that
any remaining fields should get their values
from the corresponding fields in user1,
but we can choose to specify values for
as many fields as we want in any order,
regardless of the order of the fields
in the struct’s definition.

Note that
the struct update syntax uses = like an assignment;
this is because
it moves the data,
just as we saw in the
“Variables and Data Interacting with Move” section.
In this example,
we can no longer use user1 as a whole
after creating user2
because the String in the username field of user1
was moved into user2.
If we had given user2
new String values for both email and username,
and thus only used the active and sign_in_count values from user1,
then user1 would still be valid after creating user2.
Both active and sign_in_count are types that
implement the Copy trait,
so the behavior we discussed in the
“Stack-Only Data: Copy”
section would apply.

### Using Tuple Structs Without Named Fields to Create Different Types

Rust also supports structs that
look similar to tuples,
called tuple structs.
Tuple structs
have the added meaning the struct name provides
but don’t have names associated with their fields;
rather,
they just have the types of the fields.
Tuple structs are useful
when you want to give the whole tuple a name
and make the tuple a different type from other tuples,
and when naming each field as in a regular struct
would be verbose or redundant.

To define a tuple struct,
start with the struct keyword and the struct name followed by the types in the tuple.
For example,
here we define and use two tuple structs named
Color and Point:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
struct Color(i32, i32, i32);
struct Point(i32, i32, i32);

fn main() {
    let black = Color(0, 0, 0);
    let origin = Point(0, 0, 0);
}
```

Note that the black and origin values are different types
because they’re instances of different tuple structs.
Each struct you define is its own type,
even though the fields within the struct might have the same types.
For example,
a function that takes a parameter of type Color
cannot take a Point as an argument,
even though both types are made up of three i32 values.
Otherwise,
tuple struct instances are similar to tuples in that
you can destructure them into their individual pieces,
and you can use a .
followed by the index
to access an individual value.

